Why is it that the people and the place just don't match?

I am walking down a street of Hanoi. It's mùng 5 Tết. Most of the doors are still shut. The yellow-star red flags are still swaying. But nah.. I can go on and it's not these things that make it special. You have to add in the cold, the one in a few times of the year especially for a Saigon visitor to legitimately wear nice woolly clothes. Then the trees - the trees in those old quarter streets that still manage to not be cut down yet that is. If it's something, it has got to be the trees. The Hanoian trees are just different in this season - blue grassy and leafy, blooming enough yet also worn down and jagged enough that they embody growth and decay / oldness at the same time... The streets - the pavements - are almost completely empty, everyone is either on motorbikes đi chơi Tết or clustered in the few quán cóc opening early for Tet (and charging exorbitantly for it). On my return walk, 2 old men in măng tô coats have already, out of nowhere, come out to sit and chat on a bench. The security guard peps out from the half-opened corrugated gate. Ah.. even the security guards in Hanoi somehow look neater in uniform than those in Saigon. Do they just iron their uniforms more thoroughly? .. Someone has forgotten their scarf on an empty bench. The leaves are rustling ... Scenes from a movie, really. Say what you will about the old town Hoi An or Hue, but these Tet-streets in Hanoi are the most beautiful in Vietnam. The just-right blend of eagerness and old, freshness and decay, built out of the years enough to actually have sophistication embodied.

Ah, what was that long paragraph above about? Well my point is, inhabiting such picturesque sophistication are also some of the thuggiest people I've known. And the comedy of it still perplexes me. How is it that such gentlemanly places have the thuggiest people, and then the shithole of a place like Saigon have some of the most civil people around? It's a comedy that the manner of the people and the place almost try to be the opposite. Yes, that's it. That's what this post is about. I've long seen this. The apparent layers of contradiction everywhere one looks. Saigon as a physical place is as ugly, bland, boring, chaotic and xôi thịt as it gets. Yet its people are also civil, open minded, pragmatic and inherently optimistic. Yet also life among its people feels to me capable of being eternally distant - shallow one might even say - just bondless and rootless. It's as if Saigon as a person would never allow you to grow contemplative and old, she just doesn't recognize it. Hanoi as a place, you can feel the flow of time. Cultured, one might say, or also just displaying depth and wisdom. Yet its people, ah the comedy, the myth about Trang An thanh lịch. It really is a myth. Yet again, it's also here that I would only ever see the possibility of true connection. So where do the layers end? Do they ever end for me? True story: this afternoon, lacking places to eat, I sat down at a shabby - typical that is - street-side bún ốc bánh cuốn stall. Not that I like any of those in particular, I just didn't have much choice. Right at once I felt like a baby for being away too long. The couple running the place: they look like they could wack you if you speak one word too many. The hygiene - or complete lack of it: utensils still dripping the sauces from old bowls being put straight back into use; the rau sống that looks like it was washed from toilet sinks, god helps those whose stomach simply don't react to it. Now writing this, I have to admit I'm surprised at my own ignorance that I still ate the food there. And the mythical sophistication of the Hanoians: the woman running the place - condescendingly telling me to sit down and wait, she'll let me order when she does; blatantly charging 50k for a disgusting and small portion (well, it's holiday price...), no posted price of course; totally naturally calling me "cháu" and xưng "cô" in a very cultured manner; watching and managing all the pavement tables with hawkeye competence; and very aptly adopting subtle changes in calling manners to different guests - yes, ALL of those things, everything all at once, not skipping a single beat, not breaking a sweat. THAT my friend, is the venerable Hanoian sophistication that I have never managed to develop.